[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
As important as any military detail of World War II, the military combat police providing personal protection for those conducting the war and from time to time dealing with those soldiers who through their behavior might undermine the unity of the mission.
Well, Sergeant Tom Browning of Bryan was a member of one of the very first military combat police battalions of the U.S.
Army.
As a member of the 503rd and 504th MPs, he was quickly promoted.
PFC, then Corporal, then Sergeant, then First Sergeant.
And as a result of his duty was, in December of 1944, awarded the Bronze Star Medal for what his captain called meritorious service in connection with military operations against an enemy of the United States in France.
Later, as a member of the 512th Military Police, where he was discharged from, Sergeant Browning had been attached to General George Patton's Third Army and pretty much followed Patton the duration of the war.
Tom Browning, it is a pleasure to have you on the show of Veterans of the Valley.
Let's talk about your growing up.
You grew up in La Porte, and talk about how you got into the military service.
Initially, it was with the cavalry, right?
Yes.
Well, I...
I had been working around here, there, and yonder because jobs were hard to find.
And I was in Corpus Christi and run out of job, run out of money.
Here came a recruiting outfit into town.
And talked with them.
They bought me a cup of coffee.
We had quite a conversation.
Boy, I'd have been born real on a small farm.
They had horses.
Hey, that'd be fun.
And, you know, for a year or two, it was fun.
I really thought I knew a lot about horses.
And
I did, they had four legs, tail, other things like that.
But there's a lot of things I had to learn about a horse.
And I finally learned some of those things.
And we had spent a couple of years along the border, along about that time of several organizations along the border.
This was Troop A of the 12th Cavalry, and this was at Fort Brown of Brownsville.
Yes, sir.
And up the river, about 100 miles, was the second squadron of the 12th Cavalry, and that was at Fort Ringo.
Well, the border was pretty well fortified along there.
Of course, no one was trying to get into the United States then to cause any trouble.
Right.
because if a job came open, there was about 300 people wanting that job.
Exactly.
And so border crossings was not a problem.
Anyway, we went on ahead, several maneuvers out in West Texas, first one place and another, and all of a sudden one day, you're reading in newspaper,
All the news that was going on, the Japanese sank the USS Panache in the Yankees River.
Lord God, I don't want to go to war in the Cavalry.
That type of war is old-fashioned.
What am I doing here?
I contacted my dad, and I said, contact the commanding officer, tell him I'm needed on the farm, and I think I can get a discharge.
Well, he did, and I got a dependency discharge.
Yes, sir.
But in doing so, I had joined the regular Army Reserve.
Right.
Well, in 1941, they called me back in, right back into the same organization.
It was no longer in Port Brown.
They had moved out to El Paso to... Fort Bliss?
Yeah.
Yes, sir.
And there was a lot of organizations around El Paso at that time.
Well...
I looked around and I said, well, hey, I still don't want in this cavalry during war.
Checked around, it was motorized cavalry there.
I went over and talked with them.
Oh, no, I said, we're full up.
And I said, you've got good service, but we're full up.
Well, I said, well, I need to do something.
I don't want to go to war in this Cavalry, but here I am.
I wrote a letter to Eddington Field and got an answer back.
I said, well, if you've got a 90 IQ, we'll accept you and transfer here.
Well, I had more than 90 IQ, and...
first sergeant and the company commander, both of you, I was trying to get out of there.
Well, I think everybody did, for that matter.
He came to me and said, would you like to go over and form a military police outfit?
Right.
Well, give me the particulars.
Well, he told me about it.
He said it was 1st Cavalry Division Provisional Military Police Company.
Okay.
Sounds good.
So I went to it.
Well, here come Cavalrymen from everywhere.
A nice bunch of men I'd been with as a soldier.
And we farm and had different types of training and this, that, and the other.
We went on for about 45 days.
And they broke us up.
Well, this didn't make sense.
Send us right back to the same organization we came out of.
First sergeant came to me and says, Browning, don't draw equipment.
He says, you're being transferred.
Good, where am I going?
Fort Sam, Houston.
So you went there and that was really the first contingent of MPs that formed Fort Sam Houston at that time.
And you talked to me about the people that were recruited there were ages between 21 and 28.
These were pretty sharp guys that had all applied to officer candidate school, right?
Well, we found out that in order to be in this organization, you had to have at least 110 IQ.
Yes, sir.
Which is not brilliant by any stretch of the imagination, but
you're no dumbbell either.
And so we looked and said, hey, most of these guys are qualified for OCS.
Well, a lot of them did, went off to OCS.
They made officers, some of them came back to us, some of them went to other organizations.
And at the same time, well, every place was hollering,
This is a new organization for combat military police.
Has never been heard of before.
So they wanted them.
Well, they had an opportunity to go to Iceland.
You were going to be offered a promotion to go to Iceland.
I was offered a promotion to go to Iceland.
What did you think of that?
Well, I...
Having been born and reared in a country where the mean temperature was about 28 degrees, I didn't want to go to Iceland.
I wonder why.
And I think now, and I thought later, that it would have been a good place to fight World War II.
But I don't think I could have stood the temperatures.
Sergeant Browning, you were at Fort Sam Houston, as a matter of fact, on December 7, 1941, when Pearl Harbor was attacked and when the world changed.
Talk about how it changed for you and sort of how you went from there and eventually got overseas.
Well, they were forming several different combat forces.
military police battalions in, because they had specific jobs, and they had never been formed before, so they were organizing different ones to be sent out.
Well, that's the reason promotion was so rapid, and an entire company was sent off, and it formed this entire battalion.
And another one, the contingent went off and formed.
In fact, I was offered an opportunity to go out as a first sergeant on it.
but I turned it down because it was going to Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia.
And what I had heard about that was not good.
It was a desolate place.
Anyhow, the day that I heard that the
Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor,
I was the first sergeant, and I'd been inviting these boys out of the country, and I was married at the time, and I'd make friends with them and invite them to come and have an evening meal with me.
Well, being a young man and married at that time, well, Sunday meant a day of bliss.
And so we didn't know anything about this until after they came and visited us.
Well, the following day, we were out on the rifle raids and we heard President Roosevelt declare the act of war.
The day that would live in infamy is what he said.
Let's move on.
January the 1st, 1943, that was the day that you actually left Boston Harbor.
That day we left Fort Sam Houston to go to Boston.
And then you went?
the route through the North Atlantic from Boston, that was some kind of a boat ride.
That was the most treacherous boat ride.
I understand that's the most treacherous body of water there is.
You were on the USS Elizabeth C. Stanton at the time.
Talk a little bit about it.
Everybody got sick by the time they got to Scotland, right?
It was so rough that I'd say that probably at least 90%
But the people aboard ship were sick.
And vomiting was something that was disagreeable even to think about.
Indeed.
Much less to even see.
It was so rough that if you went to the mess hall to eat, the table may buckle up while you're sitting there.
It was that rough.
Turns out that the Elizabeth C. Stanton was the flagship of the convoy, and you were the senior NCO on the Stanton.
And you eventually landed in Scotland, got onto a train, but you all really didn't know where you were going, what you were headed to.
You knew that you were about to be involved in war, though, right?
Yeah.
We knew we were in England.
We knew that war was inevitable.
We were going to be a part of it, and that's all we knew at that time.
And we went to, I believe it was called Pilgrim Hall.
How I got this name, I don't have any idea of what the name stood for.
I remember one of the gentlemen there that I met carried me to a business of a church.
And he said, this church is 400 and some odd years old.
I said, y'all don't have anything that's old, do you?
Well, if we did, it was built by the Indians because we weren't even discovered by then.
Anyhow.
I'm going to show you a picture here as we're looking at it on the screen.
And if you can recognize that picture.
This is you, I believe, on the right on this picture.
What can you tell us about that photograph?
That is Toul, France.
Uh-huh.
Yes, that's me sitting there.
With one of your war buddies in France.
Very good.
That's where we had quite a battle.
Right.
And several things of interest happened along about that time.
There was one thing we did is
combat police was that we had to be the last-ditch stand for Army headquarters.
We had to maintain the entire MSR, the main supply route.
Things moved so fast there for a period of time that we actually had to have aircraft deliver gasoline to it.
because those tanks were moving so fast that the trucks couldn't keep up with us.
Well, prisoners were here, there, and moved.
Here, there, and moved.
It was just that fast.
Another thing that happened in France, a lot of these people who had been shot down,
The French underground would bring them and turn them over to us.
The first thing they had to do was to go to Army headquarters to be interrogated, grilled, and whatever, and then sent back.
And you had lots of respect for these people.
They had done a great job.
Indeed.
Looking at another photograph now.
I'm going to show it to you.
This is you and two of your...
two of your army buddies sitting on a jeep.
Can you recall, I'll let you take a closer look at it yourself also, can you recall anything about that picture?
Yeah, I can.
I had a brother who was inducted into the Army, and my sister called and told me he was coming through the replacement depot in Fort Sam Houston.
I knew all the first sergeants over there.
I want to talk to him.
When he comes in, send him over to me and show him what I got here.
He came over and says,
How about getting in here?
Oh, absolutely not.
No way.
You go and find your place.
I have control of this place now.
Well, he did.
He became a sergeant in an outfit that went through Italy and
African, Italy, and come up through there.
And I had written to him and told him I was being relieved of my duties.
And I had written and told him to meet me in Brenner Pass.
Get a pass and meet me in Brenner Pass.
Well, I said I was being relieved of my duties, so I wasn't
aware of what was taking place, transfers of troops coming on.
Right.
Well, I went to Brenner Pass, spent the day there waiting for him.
He didn't show up.
I got back to the company, and my mail said, we're in Hall, Germany.
I told my driver, I said, it's 9 o'clock.
I said, sleep fast.
We're going to Hall, Germany.
Get up here at 5 o'clock in the morning.
Yes, sir.
And that was my brother and my driver on that Jeep.
You were the person on the left on that last picture we saw.
I want to, picture-wise, if we can, got another photograph coming up right now.
We'll just look at that.
That's another photograph of you on the left with some other of your buddies, a young military police soldier there.
I want to talk about you being attached to the headquarters company of General Patton.
The first time that you came in contact with General Patton, you told me a story.
You were a little bit surprised at what he sounded like, right?
Well, yes.
I had worked off and known out in the oil fields and anticipated, well, I knew that these oil drillers
Oh, man, they were big, burly brutes, and so was Patton.
They had a voice to match their appearance.
When the Third Army was formed in Pilgrim Hall in England, Patton assembled all the
officers and the NCOs of the first three grades and explained to them what he had planned for us to do.
When he got up there to speak and he had this pistol on his side and he looked so burglar and he had a sweet, almost a feminine type voice you ever heard and the tittering and tattering went on.
because we all had suspected the same thing.
And of course he had quite a reputation.
I will have to admit that he carried off what he said he would do.
Indeed.
We're looking at another photograph now.
This is you in the middle.
Just some other photographs from your World War II experience.
What was following Patton like?
What are some of your most vivid memories of
being in the military combat police unit that was actually attached directly to the headquarters company of General Patton.
What are some of your memories of him?
Well, I'll have to admit, I was in war.
I knew I was in war.
I knew that there were people who were after me, but I was after people also.
I felt that
What am I doing here?
Things are not as bad.
If you can see things happening and know what's happening, why can't you evade them?
Okay, that's going to be my policy.
Because I remember when I was in the second grade in school that I remember reading something in the spelling book.
It said, good, better, best, never let it rest.
till the good is better, and the better, best.
Well, that's the way I tried to make things.
When things got to where it was developed to where it looked like it was going to be bad, I would try to make it good.
And if I could make it good, it could be made better.
And that's where I lived, trying to make it.
And that's... Fortunately, I think I was successful in some respects because...
I had a wonderful company and they respected me.
Indeed.
The photograph that we're looking at now, I know you know the photograph, this is General Eisenhower inspecting some of your troops and you are the military police standing directly to the left behind General Eisenhower.
What do you remember about how that meeting came about?
It was quite a funny thing.
Patton didn't want to be stopped.
Patton wanted to go on through Germany and go on into Russia.
This was something that was quite, everybody knew it.
Well, we had gone up to the Elbe River and being right with Army headquarters, well,
There was a building there that had a large platform paid out in front of it.
I saw a fellow up there that, hey, I haven't seen his uniform.
Well, who that is?
And, of course, I had seen all the uniforms that was basically was in the Allied forces.
And so I went up and I introduced myself to him.
And he's an American.
He grabbed my hand, shook it.
He said, Ruski, he hugged me on both sides.
Well, I realized what we had done, and so had Eisenhower.
Right.
We had gone into Russian territory and was not supposed to be there.
So we were ordered back.
And Patton says, I want you to get up 20 men with clean uniforms.
I want to have Eisenhower's coming.
I want to put on an honor program for him.
Well, I found 14 men with clean uniforms.
And that was a difficult task.
Right.
And that's what that picture that we saw before.
We're looking at a picture right now, a much more recent picture.
I think this was taken just a year or so ago of the 61st reunion, and you're cutting a cake.
What were we looking at there?
What was that reunion?
Well, we mentioned this other picture.
One of the things that happened to me was I now walked up to me and said,
What Cavalry out there are you out of?
Right.
Well, I told him, Troop A-12 Cavalry, sir.
Well, that was just, we were so busy after that, my company commander didn't get to ask me about it.
So he did ask me later after the reunion why he had asked me that.
So I explained it to him then.
But the Cavalry actually had formed this...
organization, the first 504th Military Police Battalion that had formed.
The contingent was taken out of the cavalry.
Well, I was the only cavalryman they could find that was still alive.
that knew anything about the formation of it.
Well, they wanted all this information.
So they paid my way to Fort Lewis, Washington, and I said, I can't go, I can't see, and I'll have to use my walker.
I had no problem.
My son came and said, well, Dad, if you go,
I'll pay my way and go out there, will you?
Okay, that's fine.
I'll go.
As Art called them, ask them if I can bring my walker.
Oh, no, we'll push you around in a wheelchair.
Well, I never rode in a wheelchair so much all my life.
I bet that's right.
We're running out of time, Sergeant Browning.
I know that your unit also was involved in the liberation of Berlin towards the end of World War II, and we want to thank you for your service.
I wish we had more time to talk about your remarkable tour of duty, but most I'll salute you and thank you very much for your service, and we appreciate you being here.
Thank you, Sergeant Browning.
Well, thank you.
Tom Browning served more than four years in the Army from February 1941 to September 1945.
He supervised the work of some 518 soldiers while serving in northern France, the Ardennes, Rhineland, Normandy, and Central Europe.
A proud resident of the Brazos Valley and a proud veteran of World War II.
We salute Sergeant Tom Browning and all veterans for their service.
And we thank also our underwriter, First National Bank.
And please be sure to read more stories of veterans
in Brazos Valley Heroes each Sunday in the Eagle.
For Sergeant Tom Browning, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Music.]